docs/INSTALL.md, before:

# ClamUI Installation Guide

This document provides comprehensive installation instructions for ClamUI on Linux systems.

## Table of Contents

1. [Quick Start](#quick-start)
2. [Flatpak Installation](#flatpak-installation)
3. [Debian Package Installation](#debian-package-installation)
4. [File Manager Context Menu](#file-manager-context-menu)
5. [System Tray Integration](#system-tray-integration)
6. [Verification](#verification)
7. [Icon Troubleshooting](#icon-troubleshooting)
8. [Uninstallation](#uninstallation)

---

## Quick Start

The recommended installation method depends on your Linux distribution:

| Distribution               | Recommended Method                           |
| -------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| Any (universal)            | [Flatpak](#flatpak-installation)             |
| Debian, Ubuntu, Linux Mint | [.deb package](#debian-package-installation) |
| Fedora, Arch, others       | [Flatpak](#flatpak-installation)             |

---

## Flatpak Installation

Flatpak is the recommended installation method as it works on any Linux distribution and includes automatic updates.

### Prerequisites

Ensure Flatpak is installed on your system:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt install flatpak

# Fedora (pre-installed)
# flatpak is included by default

# Arch Linux
sudo pacman -S flatpak
```

Add the Flathub repository if not already configured:

```bash
flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists flathub https://dl.flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo
```

### Install ClamUI

```bash
flatpak install flathub io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

> **Note:** The Flatpak version bundles ClamAV internally — no separate ClamAV installation is required. This bundled ClamAV is only available within the Flatpak sandbox and is not installed system-wide.

### Update Virus Definitions

After installation, launch ClamUI and run a database update from the application to download the latest virus definitions.

### Run ClamUI

```bash
flatpak run io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

Or find "ClamUI" in your application menu.

> **Troubleshooting**: If you encounter issues with the Flatpak installation, see [Flatpak-Specific Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#flatpak-specific-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

### Flatpak Permissions

ClamUI requests the following permissions:

| Permission                            | Purpose                                                       |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--filesystem=host`                   | Full filesystem access for scanning and quarantine operations |
| `--talk-name=org.freedesktop.Flatpak` | Execute host systemctl for scheduled scan timers              |
| `--socket=session-bus`                | Desktop notifications for scan completion                     |
| `--socket=wayland`                    | Native Wayland display support                                |
| `--socket=fallback-x11`               | X11 compatibility                                             |

### Managing Permissions

View current permissions:

```bash
flatpak info --show-permissions io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

Override permissions if needed:

```bash
# Grant access to additional directories
flatpak override --user --filesystem=/path/to/directory io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

---

## Debian Package Installation

For Debian, Ubuntu, and derivative distributions, ClamUI is available as a `.deb` package.

### Prerequisites

Install the required system dependencies:

```bash
# GTK4, Adwaita, and Python bindings
sudo apt install python3-gi python3-gi-cairo gir1.2-gtk-4.0 gir1.2-adw-1

# Build dependencies (required for pycairo/PyGObject compilation)
sudo apt install python3-dev libcairo2-dev libgirepository-2.0-dev pkg-config

# Build dependencies for Pillow (tray icon support)
sudo apt install libjpeg-dev zlib1g-dev

# ClamAV antivirus
sudo apt install clamav
```

> **Note:** The build dependencies (`python3-dev`, `libcairo2-dev`, `libgirepository-2.0-dev`, `pkg-config`, `libjpeg-dev`, `zlib1g-dev`) are required when running from source with `uv run clamui`. The pre-built `.deb` package includes compiled binaries and may not require all build dependencies. On older Ubuntu versions (22.04), use `libgirepository1.0-dev` instead.

**Quick Start (from source):** The `local-run.sh` script in the repository root automatically installs all dependencies and runs ClamUI:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/linx-systems/clamui.git
cd clamui
./local-run.sh
```

### Download and Install

Download the latest `.deb` package from the [releases page](https://github.com/linx-systems/clamui/releases), then install:

```bash
# Install the package
sudo dpkg -i clamui_*.deb

# Resolve any missing dependencies
sudo apt install -f
```

Or install directly with apt:

```bash
sudo apt install ./clamui_*.deb
```

### What Gets Installed

| Path                                                                       | Description                |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `/usr/bin/clamui`                                                          | Launcher script            |
| `/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/clamui/`                                   | Python application modules |
| `/usr/share/applications/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.desktop`            | Desktop entry file         |
| `/usr/share/icons/hicolor/scalable/apps/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.svg` | Application icon           |

### Run ClamUI

```bash
clamui
```

Or find "ClamUI" in your application menu.

> **Troubleshooting**: If you encounter issues with missing dependencies or ClamAV installation, see [ClamAV Installation Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#clamav-installation-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

---

## File Manager Context Menu

ClamUI integrates with file managers to provide a "Scan with ClamUI" right-click option.

### Supported File Managers

| File Manager | Desktop  | Integration Type     |
| ------------ | -------- | -------------------- |
| Nautilus     | GNOME    | Desktop entry action |
| Dolphin      | KDE      | Desktop entry action |
| Nemo         | Cinnamon | Native Nemo action   |

### Flatpak Users

If you installed ClamUI via Flatpak, context menu integration is **included automatically**. The Flatpak manifest includes the necessary filesystem permissions to access files for scanning.

### Native Installation

For native (non-Flatpak) installations, set up context menu integration manually:

#### GNOME (Nautilus) and KDE (Dolphin)

1. **Copy the desktop file**:

   ```bash
   cp io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.desktop ~/.local/share/applications/
   ```

2. **Update the desktop database**:

   ```bash
   update-desktop-database ~/.local/share/applications
   ```

3. **Restart your file manager**:

   ```bash
   # For GNOME (Nautilus):
   nautilus -q

   # For KDE (Dolphin):
   killall dolphin
   ```

#### Cinnamon (Nemo)

Nemo uses its own action format for context menu extensions:

1. **Create the Nemo actions directory**:

   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.local/share/nemo/actions
   ```

2. **Copy the Nemo action file**:

   ```bash
   cp io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.nemo_action ~/.local/share/nemo/actions/
   ```

3. **Restart Nemo**:
   ```bash
   nemo -q
   ```

### Using the Context Menu

| Action                 | Description                                                      |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Single file**        | Right-click a file and select "Scan with ClamUI"                 |
| **Folder**             | Right-click a folder to recursively scan all contents            |
| **Multiple selection** | Select multiple files/folders, right-click, and scan all at once |

### Verifying Context Menu Installation

Check that the integration files are installed:

```bash
# Desktop entry
ls ~/.local/share/applications/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.desktop

# Nemo action (if using Nemo)
ls ~/.local/share/nemo/actions/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.nemo_action
```

If the context menu doesn't appear:

1. Log out and log back in
2. Manually refresh the desktop database:
   ```bash
   update-desktop-database ~/.local/share/applications
   gtk-update-icon-cache -f -t ~/.local/share/icons/hicolor
   ```

> **Troubleshooting**: For more detailed troubleshooting of context menu issues, see [File Manager Context Menu Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#file-manager-context-menu-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

---

## System Tray Integration

ClamUI provides an optional system tray icon for quick access to scanning functions.

### Features

| Feature              | Description                                                              |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Status Indicator** | Tray icon shows protection status (protected, warning, scanning, threat) |
| **Quick Actions**    | Right-click menu for Quick Scan, Full Scan, and Update Definitions       |
| **Scan Progress**    | Shows scan progress percentage during active scans                       |
| **Window Toggle**    | Click the tray icon to show/hide the main window                         |
| **Minimize to Tray** | Option to hide to tray instead of taskbar when minimizing                |

### Requirements

The system tray feature requires the AyatanaAppIndicator3 library:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt install gir1.2-ayatanaappindicator3-0.1

# Fedora
sudo dnf install libayatana-appindicator-gtk3

# Arch Linux
sudo pacman -S libayatana-appindicator
```

### GNOME Shell Users

GNOME Shell requires an additional extension for tray icon support:

1. Install the [AppIndicator Support](https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/615/appindicator-support/) extension
2. Enable the extension in GNOME Extensions app

### Graceful Degradation

If the AppIndicator library is not installed, ClamUI runs normally without the tray icon feature. The application logs a warning but continues to function with all other features.

> **Troubleshooting**: If the system tray icon is not appearing or not working correctly, see [System Tray Icon Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#system-tray-icon-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

---

## Verification

After installation, verify that ClamUI is working correctly.

### Check Installation

```bash
# For native installation
which clamui
clamui --version

# For Flatpak
flatpak info io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

### Check ClamAV

```bash
# Verify ClamAV is installed
clamscan --version

# Check virus database is up to date
freshclam --version
```

### Test a Scan

Launch ClamUI and perform a test scan on a small directory to verify everything is working.

> **Troubleshooting**: If ClamAV is not detected or scanning fails, see [ClamAV Installation Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#clamav-installation-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

---

## Icon Troubleshooting

If the ClamUI icon doesn't appear in your application menu or system tray after installation, try these solutions.

### Desktop Icon Not Appearing (Debian Package)

After installing the `.deb` package, the desktop icon may not appear immediately in some desktop environments. This is because running sessions cache icon databases.

**Solutions (try in order):**

1. **Wait a moment** - Some desktop environments refresh automatically within 30-60 seconds

2. **Force refresh the desktop database:**
   ```bash
   sudo update-desktop-database /usr/share/applications
   sudo gtk-update-icon-cache -f -t /usr/share/icons/hicolor
   xdg-desktop-menu forceupdate --mode system
   ```

3. **Log out and log back in** - This refreshes all desktop environment caches

4. **Reboot** - As a last resort, this ensures all caches are rebuilt

### Tray Icon Not Appearing (Running from Source)

When running ClamUI from source with `uv run clamui`, the tray icon requires additional Python dependencies:

```bash
# Verify Pillow is available
uv run python -c "from PIL import Image; print('Pillow OK')"

# Verify cairosvg is available (for SVG icon support)
uv run python -c "import cairosvg; print('cairosvg OK')"
```

If either import fails, ensure the build dependencies are installed:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt install libjpeg-dev zlib1g-dev

# Then reinstall Python dependencies
uv sync
```

### KDE Plasma Specific

KDE Plasma uses its own icon cache system. If icons don't appear:

```bash
# Rebuild KDE cache (Plasma 5)
kbuildsycoca5 --noincremental

# Rebuild KDE cache (Plasma 6)
kbuildsycoca6 --noincremental
```

---

## Uninstallation

### Flatpak

```bash
flatpak uninstall io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

### Debian Package

```bash
# Remove (keeps configuration files)
sudo dpkg -r clamui

# Purge (removes everything including config)
sudo dpkg -P clamui
```

### Context Menu Cleanup

If you manually installed context menu integration:

```bash
# Remove desktop entry
rm ~/.local/share/applications/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.desktop

# Remove Nemo action
rm ~/.local/share/nemo/actions/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.nemo_action

# Refresh desktop database
update-desktop-database ~/.local/share/applications
```

---

## See Also

- [README.md](../README.md) - Project overview and quick start
- [CONFIGURATION.md](./CONFIGURATION.md) - Configuration reference and settings guide
- [TROUBLESHOOTING.md](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md) - Troubleshooting common issues
- [DEVELOPMENT.md](./DEVELOPMENT.md) - Development setup and contributing

Commit message:

fix(icons): add Cinnamon-specific icon cache refresh
- Add dbus-send to org.Cinnamon.ReloadTheme in postinst for Cinnamon
  desktop icon refresh without logout
- Touch desktop file to trigger file monitor refresh in some DEs
- Add Cinnamon troubleshooting section to INSTALL.md

docs/INSTALL.md, after:

# ClamUI Installation Guide

This document provides comprehensive installation instructions for ClamUI on Linux systems.

## Table of Contents

1. [Quick Start](#quick-start)
2. [Flatpak Installation](#flatpak-installation)
3. [Debian Package Installation](#debian-package-installation)
4. [File Manager Context Menu](#file-manager-context-menu)
5. [System Tray Integration](#system-tray-integration)
6. [Verification](#verification)
7. [Icon Troubleshooting](#icon-troubleshooting)
8. [Uninstallation](#uninstallation)

---

## Quick Start

The recommended installation method depends on your Linux distribution:

| Distribution               | Recommended Method                           |
| -------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| Any (universal)            | [Flatpak](#flatpak-installation)             |
| Debian, Ubuntu, Linux Mint | [.deb package](#debian-package-installation) |
| Fedora, Arch, others       | [Flatpak](#flatpak-installation)             |

---

## Flatpak Installation

Flatpak is the recommended installation method as it works on any Linux distribution and includes automatic updates.

### Prerequisites

Ensure Flatpak is installed on your system:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt install flatpak

# Fedora (pre-installed)
# flatpak is included by default

# Arch Linux
sudo pacman -S flatpak
```

Add the Flathub repository if not already configured:

```bash
flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists flathub https://dl.flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo
```

### Install ClamUI

```bash
flatpak install flathub io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

> **Note:** The Flatpak version bundles ClamAV internally — no separate ClamAV installation is required. This bundled ClamAV is only available within the Flatpak sandbox and is not installed system-wide.

### Update Virus Definitions

After installation, launch ClamUI and run a database update from the application to download the latest virus definitions.

### Run ClamUI

```bash
flatpak run io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

Or find "ClamUI" in your application menu.

> **Troubleshooting**: If you encounter issues with the Flatpak installation, see [Flatpak-Specific Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#flatpak-specific-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

### Flatpak Permissions

ClamUI requests the following permissions:

| Permission                            | Purpose                                                       |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--filesystem=host`                   | Full filesystem access for scanning and quarantine operations |
| `--talk-name=org.freedesktop.Flatpak` | Execute host systemctl for scheduled scan timers              |
| `--socket=session-bus`                | Desktop notifications for scan completion                     |
| `--socket=wayland`                    | Native Wayland display support                                |
| `--socket=fallback-x11`               | X11 compatibility                                             |

### Managing Permissions

View current permissions:

```bash
flatpak info --show-permissions io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

Override permissions if needed:

```bash
# Grant access to additional directories
flatpak override --user --filesystem=/path/to/directory io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

---

## Debian Package Installation

For Debian, Ubuntu, and derivative distributions, ClamUI is available as a `.deb` package.

### Prerequisites

Install the required system dependencies:

```bash
# GTK4, Adwaita, and Python bindings
sudo apt install python3-gi python3-gi-cairo gir1.2-gtk-4.0 gir1.2-adw-1

# Build dependencies (required for pycairo/PyGObject compilation)
sudo apt install python3-dev libcairo2-dev libgirepository-2.0-dev pkg-config

# Build dependencies for Pillow (tray icon support)
sudo apt install libjpeg-dev zlib1g-dev

# ClamAV antivirus
sudo apt install clamav
```

> **Note:** The build dependencies (`python3-dev`, `libcairo2-dev`, `libgirepository-2.0-dev`, `pkg-config`, `libjpeg-dev`, `zlib1g-dev`) are required when running from source with `uv run clamui`. The pre-built `.deb` package includes compiled binaries and may not require all build dependencies. On older Ubuntu versions (22.04), use `libgirepository1.0-dev` instead.

**Quick Start (from source):** The `local-run.sh` script in the repository root automatically installs all dependencies and runs ClamUI:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/linx-systems/clamui.git
cd clamui
./local-run.sh
```

### Download and Install

Download the latest `.deb` package from the [releases page](https://github.com/linx-systems/clamui/releases), then install:

```bash
# Install the package
sudo dpkg -i clamui_*.deb

# Resolve any missing dependencies
sudo apt install -f
```

Or install directly with apt:

```bash
sudo apt install ./clamui_*.deb
```

### What Gets Installed

| Path                                                                       | Description                |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `/usr/bin/clamui`                                                          | Launcher script            |
| `/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/clamui/`                                   | Python application modules |
| `/usr/share/applications/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.desktop`            | Desktop entry file         |
| `/usr/share/icons/hicolor/scalable/apps/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.svg` | Application icon           |

### Run ClamUI

```bash
clamui
```

Or find "ClamUI" in your application menu.

> **Troubleshooting**: If you encounter issues with missing dependencies or ClamAV installation, see [ClamAV Installation Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#clamav-installation-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

---

## File Manager Context Menu

ClamUI integrates with file managers to provide a "Scan with ClamUI" right-click option.

### Supported File Managers

| File Manager | Desktop  | Integration Type     |
| ------------ | -------- | -------------------- |
| Nautilus     | GNOME    | Desktop entry action |
| Dolphin      | KDE      | Desktop entry action |
| Nemo         | Cinnamon | Native Nemo action   |

### Flatpak Users

If you installed ClamUI via Flatpak, context menu integration is **included automatically**. The Flatpak manifest includes the necessary filesystem permissions to access files for scanning.

### Native Installation

For native (non-Flatpak) installations, set up context menu integration manually:

#### GNOME (Nautilus) and KDE (Dolphin)

1. **Copy the desktop file**:

   ```bash
   cp io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.desktop ~/.local/share/applications/
   ```

2. **Update the desktop database**:

   ```bash
   update-desktop-database ~/.local/share/applications
   ```

3. **Restart your file manager**:

   ```bash
   # For GNOME (Nautilus):
   nautilus -q

   # For KDE (Dolphin):
   killall dolphin
   ```

#### Cinnamon (Nemo)

Nemo uses its own action format for context menu extensions:

1. **Create the Nemo actions directory**:

   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.local/share/nemo/actions
   ```

2. **Copy the Nemo action file**:

   ```bash
   cp io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.nemo_action ~/.local/share/nemo/actions/
   ```

3. **Restart Nemo**:
   ```bash
   nemo -q
   ```

### Using the Context Menu

| Action                 | Description                                                      |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Single file**        | Right-click a file and select "Scan with ClamUI"                 |
| **Folder**             | Right-click a folder to recursively scan all contents            |
| **Multiple selection** | Select multiple files/folders, right-click, and scan all at once |

### Verifying Context Menu Installation

Check that the integration files are installed:

```bash
# Desktop entry
ls ~/.local/share/applications/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.desktop

# Nemo action (if using Nemo)
ls ~/.local/share/nemo/actions/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.nemo_action
```

If the context menu doesn't appear:

1. Log out and log back in
2. Manually refresh the desktop database:
   ```bash
   update-desktop-database ~/.local/share/applications
   gtk-update-icon-cache -f -t ~/.local/share/icons/hicolor
   ```

> **Troubleshooting**: For more detailed troubleshooting of context menu issues, see [File Manager Context Menu Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#file-manager-context-menu-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

---

## System Tray Integration

ClamUI provides an optional system tray icon for quick access to scanning functions.

### Features

| Feature              | Description                                                              |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Status Indicator** | Tray icon shows protection status (protected, warning, scanning, threat) |
| **Quick Actions**    | Right-click menu for Quick Scan, Full Scan, and Update Definitions       |
| **Scan Progress**    | Shows scan progress percentage during active scans                       |
| **Window Toggle**    | Click the tray icon to show/hide the main window                         |
| **Minimize to Tray** | Option to hide to tray instead of taskbar when minimizing                |

### Requirements

The system tray feature requires the AyatanaAppIndicator3 library:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt install gir1.2-ayatanaappindicator3-0.1

# Fedora
sudo dnf install libayatana-appindicator-gtk3

# Arch Linux
sudo pacman -S libayatana-appindicator
```

### GNOME Shell Users

GNOME Shell requires an additional extension for tray icon support:

1. Install the [AppIndicator Support](https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/615/appindicator-support/) extension
2. Enable the extension in GNOME Extensions app

### Graceful Degradation

If the AppIndicator library is not installed, ClamUI runs normally without the tray icon feature. The application logs a warning but continues to function with all other features.

> **Troubleshooting**: If the system tray icon is not appearing or not working correctly, see [System Tray Icon Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#system-tray-icon-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

---

## Verification

After installation, verify that ClamUI is working correctly.

### Check Installation

```bash
# For native installation
which clamui
clamui --version

# For Flatpak
flatpak info io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

### Check ClamAV

```bash
# Verify ClamAV is installed
clamscan --version

# Check virus database is up to date
freshclam --version
```

### Test a Scan

Launch ClamUI and perform a test scan on a small directory to verify everything is working.

> **Troubleshooting**: If ClamAV is not detected or scanning fails, see [ClamAV Installation Issues](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md#clamav-installation-issues) in the troubleshooting guide.

---

## Icon Troubleshooting

If the ClamUI icon doesn't appear in your application menu or system tray after installation, try these solutions.

### Desktop Icon Not Appearing (Debian Package)

After installing the `.deb` package, the desktop icon may not appear immediately in some desktop environments. This is because running sessions cache icon databases.

**Solutions (try in order):**

1. **Wait a moment** - Some desktop environments refresh automatically within 30-60 seconds

2. **Force refresh the desktop database:**
   ```bash
   sudo update-desktop-database /usr/share/applications
   sudo gtk-update-icon-cache -f -t /usr/share/icons/hicolor
   xdg-desktop-menu forceupdate --mode system
   ```

3. **Log out and log back in** - This refreshes all desktop environment caches

4. **Reboot** - As a last resort, this ensures all caches are rebuilt

### Tray Icon Not Appearing (Running from Source)

When running ClamUI from source with `uv run clamui`, the tray icon requires additional Python dependencies:

```bash
# Verify Pillow is available
uv run python -c "from PIL import Image; print('Pillow OK')"

# Verify cairosvg is available (for SVG icon support)
uv run python -c "import cairosvg; print('cairosvg OK')"
```

If either import fails, ensure the build dependencies are installed:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt install libjpeg-dev zlib1g-dev

# Then reinstall Python dependencies
uv sync
```

### Cinnamon Specific

Cinnamon caches menu icons separately and may not respond to standard refresh commands. If the icon shows as a default/generic icon:

```bash
# Force Cinnamon to reload its theme (includes icons)
dbus-send --session --dest=org.Cinnamon --type=method_call \
    /org/Cinnamon org.Cinnamon.ReloadTheme

# Alternative: restart Cinnamon (will briefly flash the screen)
cinnamon --replace &
```

If the icon still doesn't appear, logging out and back in is the most reliable solution for Cinnamon.

### KDE Plasma Specific

KDE Plasma uses its own icon cache system. If icons don't appear:

```bash
# Rebuild KDE cache (Plasma 5)
kbuildsycoca5 --noincremental

# Rebuild KDE cache (Plasma 6)
kbuildsycoca6 --noincremental
```

---

## Uninstallation

### Flatpak

```bash
flatpak uninstall io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI
```

### Debian Package

```bash
# Remove (keeps configuration files)
sudo dpkg -r clamui

# Purge (removes everything including config)
sudo dpkg -P clamui
```

### Context Menu Cleanup

If you manually installed context menu integration:

```bash
# Remove desktop entry
rm ~/.local/share/applications/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.desktop

# Remove Nemo action
rm ~/.local/share/nemo/actions/io.github.linx_systems.ClamUI.nemo_action

# Refresh desktop database
update-desktop-database ~/.local/share/applications
```

---

## See Also

- [README.md](../README.md) - Project overview and quick start
- [CONFIGURATION.md](./CONFIGURATION.md) - Configuration reference and settings guide
- [TROUBLESHOOTING.md](./TROUBLESHOOTING.md) - Troubleshooting common issues
- [DEVELOPMENT.md](./DEVELOPMENT.md) - Development setup and contributing
